WEBVTT - Subtitles by: DownloadYoutubeSubtitles.com
you cannot stop me I spend 30,000 men a
month such was the ominous proclamation
of Napoleon to his
Rivals it was said at a time when France
unique among its contemporaries raised
millions of men to wage vast Wars which
burned across Europe and Beyond yet
while the revolution had been the first
to unlock the mass mobilization of the
French population it would be Napoleon
who molded them into an efficient weapon
which he wielded to devastating effect
both at the Strategic and tactical
level this concept was epitomized by the
formation of the grand arm and its
system of flexible combined arms core
capable of independent operations across
a massive front but to understand these
systems we must bring them to life from
the organization of the smallest section
to the largest
Brigade their formations in
battle and
Beyond this is the true size of
Napoleon's
Army today's video was brought to you by
Opera they offer a free desktop browser
that makes navigating the internet so
much easier faster safer and smarter as
especially compared to your default
options so one of my favorite things is
the tab Islands which lets you organize
your open tabs this is a godsend as I
routinely have a bajillion tabs open as
I pour through online papers art
references and other materials for
documentaries now I can easily group
these tabs for work for documentaries
for personal use how I want them it's
very modular easy to expand collapse
reorganize and shift them as needed and
bookmark all of these as you go along
Opera users now also get access to Arya
a free AI service which is built into
the EXP experience so you can highlight
any text on screen to explore explain or
translate a selection or alternatively
you can open a sidebar to ask Arya to
answer questions and generate content
with real-time access to the web for
instance while researching this episode
I was able to get some fast
clarifications on the difference between
a fuzer and chesal infantry unit the AI
gave me a great comparison on their
historical origin function and purpose
with a nice summary at the end Opera
also comes with a built-in ad blocker as
well as a VPN with no need for
additional extensions you can also
integrate music streaming and messages
into your browser so if you want to
experience the internet safer faster and
smarter then definitely go ahead and
check out oper 1 in the link in the
description check it out enjoy and I'll
see you in the
video before we begin it must be
admitted that the scope of Napoleon's
Army is extremely difficult to cover
while we will do our best to piece
together its building blocks to scale in
true size it will be beneficial to First
ground our understanding with a
simplified
explanation at the highest level was the
French Imperial Army which consisted of
the Empire's entire land Force
Branch this Behemoth was broken out into
various commands and organizations the
largest of these was the Grand arm led
by Napoleon himself though it evolved
over time the grand arm can be
approximately modeled as containing the
Imperial Guard the Cavalry reserve and
about six Army
cores these were new Innovative
organizations meant to act as many
armies with reduced administrative and
logistical needs capable of independent
operations for greater strategic
flexibility each was a combined arms
force of about 25,000 men here we have
shown its two to four infantry divisions
the Cavalry division the Artillery
Brigade as well as its engineer and
support group
[Music]
groups given that the Infantry are the
most numerous we will first delve into
their
ranks here is a road map of their
organizational structure if you'd like
to pause the video please do so
now but without further delay let us
begin with the first building
block at the lowest level French
soldiers live together in groups called
ordinaire usually 14 to 16 strong
and led by a
Corporal this group would share a large
common tent or two smaller tents on the
rare occasion tents were
available most of the time though the
men bivak in improvised straw and wood
shelters or under the stars or were
boted on households along the line of
March in Camp they also shared a common
soup kettle into which the men would
contribute their rations for shared
meals the Corporal would handle the
shopping for supplies as well as the
hiring of washer
women four squads would form a section
with a total of about 60 Men Four
corporals and perhaps a half dozen
tents in combat however these four
squads would be rearranged into three
Lines within this battle line each
Soldier was allotted one French Pace or
spacing
the first rank would fire from a
kneeling position while those of the
second rank fired while standing above
them meanwhile the third rank stood
close behind to receive spent muskets
reload them and cycle them back to the
front alternatively the third rank might
be detached and sent ahead of the force
as
skirmishers when casualties were high
the men of this third rank would be
pulled to the front to maintain the
width of the unit by 18133 the French
army was so depleted that Napoleon would
actually issue an order adopting the
two- rank battle line as a standard yet
the extent to which this was adopted in
the midst of a hardfought campaign is
not well
understood next up the organization two
sections would come together to form a
company of about 120 privates and eight
corporals this unit would be led by a
captain along with an additional Command
Staff that consisted of a lieutenant a
sue Lieutenant a sergeant major four
sergeants a fua and two
[Music]
drummers most of these officers would
have had a non-combatant servant called
a domestique resulting in about 5 to 10
such individuals per company in addition
lieutenants and captains were allowed
horses if they were over 50 though not
many lived that that long in the wars of
the
Empire to account for this our model
will assume two horse
spares for shelter we will also assume
that our company has about 18 t0 between
the men and
officers within the French army a
company was an administrative unit whose
Command Staff would be expected to see
to the proper maintenance of its men for
instance the fer managed the procurement
and distribution of his unit supplies
as such we might expect such officers to
have been educated men from the upper
echelons of
society this was certainly the case for
most armies of the era whose wealthy
classes often bought their
commissions however the French had
largely done away with this system
following the Revolution and by the time
of the Napoleonic Wars promotions were
largely merit-based thus among these
ranks we would actually expect to see a
more representative slice of
society at this point we should also
note that the men of each of these
administrative companies would also
double as a combat unit known as the
platoon for the sake of this video
though we shall continue to refer to
them as companies to limit
confusion in battle this Force arrayed
its men into three lines with the first
section on the right flank and the
second section on the Left Flank
the four corporals of each section stood
in each corner of either formation to
help guide the rank and file troops the
captain meanwhile led the entire company
from his own file on the far
right however given that such units
measured roughly 30 m across the
remainder of the Command Staff would be
spread out along its width two paces
from the troops to maintain proper
alignment Flags helped the men visually
remain in good order while drums audibly
kept them in
syn at the next organizational level
multiple companies would be joined into
a
battalion this was the most common
Tactical Unit on the Napoleonic
Battlefield as such it could come in
many shapes and sizes with both the type
and number of companies in a battalion
varying over
time with regards to type there were
light and line infantry each with their
own subtype Loosely graded on height for
instance the light troops were broken
out into the vaulty gear the chasser
appier and the carabineer while the
regular troops were broken out into the
fuselier and the
Grenadier generally speaking the light
troops acted as skirmishers while the
regular troops fought in the main battle
line however in practice they received
much the same training and often saw
their roles overlap in combat
in 1808 we might find the following
battalions in common
use a French light infantry battalion
with one company of voltiger four
companies of chasu and one company of
caribiner a frenchline infantry
battalion with one company of voltiger
four companies of
fuselier and one company of
Grenadier for our purposes we will now
look more closely at one of these
typical line infantry
battalions here we see it six companies
totaling about 720 soldiers and 114
officers whose organization we
previously defined added to them is a
Command Staff led by a mounted Chef Deon
and his
assistants the agitant major and two
agitant sub officers once more each of
these men will have had their own
domestique which we assume total about
five such
non-combatants the unit also had its own
flag bearer who proudly displayed the
identity of his
unit in terms of support each Battalion
would have an ammunition wagon and a
ration wagon each manned by a pair of
drivers as well as four pack horses to
carry various baggage but perhaps most
important would be four women known as
the canier
considered absolutely necessary to the
functioning of the army and mandated by
Consular decree they sold food and drink
to the Troops while handling many other
day-to-day needs of the men such as
clothes washing and repair to ensure
good order these women had to be
licensed by the Army and were usually
married to soldiers in the
unit zooming back out to consider our
entire Battalion we see that it has
roughly 720 solders soldiers 120
officers 60 support staff 16 horses two
wagons and about 110
tents in combat a battalion might adopt
the following formations line column and
square let's quickly review each of
these a six company Battalion in line
formation appeared as follows the elites
volar and Grenadier companies protect
the flanks while the four fuselier
companies take up the center each
maintains roughly two paces of spacing
to prevent
collisions the battalion's officers
meanwhile are dispersed across the
formation's 200 M front in the center
the Bannerman proudly waves the flag
meant to serve as a visual and
psychological anchor for the
force it is protected by the men of the
fanon's Guard about 15 M behind them
rides the chef de beton who has the best
view of the entire unit besides him are
the drummers drawn up from each
company flanking him about 20 M on
either side are the agitant and Sue
agitant Majors who supervise each Wing
at the extreme ends of the line are one
of each flank company sergeants who acts
as a GID
General when the order to advance comes
they and the first rank of the Fan's
guard will will step out in front of the
entire Battalion set up the alignment of
the men and Signal back to the commander
that he can now give the final order to
March however it is extremely difficult
to keep such long lines of men in good
order even in the best of conditions
thus it was that they often formed into
columns for more rapid
movement a column could take many forms
depending on the situation variables
included the frontage and the depth of
the
formation generally speaking the smaller
the front the more quick and mobile the
force for instance March columns
typically adopted a three-man frontage
to squeeze into the available Road
however this came at the cost of
forward-facing Firepower and an
increased vulnerability to artillery
fire thus in combat attack columns
traded depth for
Frontage
in this case we have chosen a battalion
with a two compan Frontage also
confusingly referred to as a division
and a half interval depth here we see
the four fuselier companies making up
the front two divisions while the elite
voltear and Grenadier companies making
up the rear division in width they
measure 70 M and depth they measure 70
M the shef de Pon and the drummers
likely take Pi up the rear while his
agitant and Sue agitant Majors supervise
the first and last
division this formation was often a
favorite of commanders on the attack its
Frontage maintained a useful balance of
speed and Firepower while its half
interval spacing left large enough of a
gap to reduce the damage of artillery
fire but small enough of a gap that the
men of the rear could quickly be brought
up to evolve the formation in most cases
this meant switching from column into
line just before joining battle against
other infantry yet the column could
easily transform into a square to repel
Cavalry this would be done by having the
two companies of the middle division
wield to either side hence the half
interval depth which left a company
sized gap for such situations with the
three sides of the Box thus formed the
last division had merely to advance to
complete its defenses over overall the
completed square formation measured
roughly 70 M wide and 40 m deep from
here the men could present a dense wall
of bristling bayonets to dissuade all
but the bravest Horse and Rider from
charging while firing at any troops
mounted or on foot who dared approach
the process of forming this Square was
said to take just 30 seconds on the
parade ground even if the battlefield
conditions caused some delay it was
certainly a rapid
maneuver thus we see how the Battalion
the main tactical infantry unit of the
French army could be efficiently wielded
by its
commanders yet such groups did not act
alone and Napoleon's infantry often
found themselves grouped into even
larger units for both administrative and
combat
purposes next up the organizational lad
was a regiment in 1808 a French regiment
consisted of five battalions four of
which were War battalions with the final
one being a Depo Battalion whose purpose
was to remain behind to collect equip
and train new recruits before marching
them to the
front thus a regiment rarely found
itself marshaled together in one place
and even the four War battalions often
found themselves dispersed in the chaos
of a campaign
given these realities we will actually
be modeling the more likely Battlefield
strength of a regiment by assuming it
deploys with just two of its five
battalions using our prior figures it
numbers about
staff 32 horses four wagons and 220
tents added to this was a regimental
headquarters and a small baggage train
let us take a closer look at each of
these a regiment's field headquarters of
about 25 included its Colonel paym Eagle
bearers musicians and
surgeons the colonel commanded the
regiment or as many battalions of the
regiment as were present the pay Master
naturally enough distributed pay the
eagle bearers carried the regiment
Imperial standards which had been
personally distributed by Napoleon
himself in Imitation of the ancient
Roman practice of the legionary
Eagles these standards were held with
great honor and pride by the first
Battalion of a regiment the eagle Bearer
himself was a lieutenant who was flanked
by two halir wielding sergeants and
backed up by a fua from each of the
first battalion's six companies nearby
stood the regiment's musicians who were
led by its drum major the drum Corporal
and bandm with seven
bandsmen meanwhile a surgeon major led
the regiment's medical services with
four assistant surgeons and five sub
assistants with regards to the baggage
train the regiment had a wagon for shoes
a wagon for baggage and at least one
wagon for the medical staff in combat
all could have doubled as transports for
the
wounded a Satler woman with her own
wagon serviced the regimental
headquarters the regiment's colonel
meanwhile had his own support elements
in the form of two servants three riding
horses three pack horses a wagon with
two draft horses and two
drivers between the Personnel of the
field headquarters and the baggage train
we might assume about about 10
additional
tents thus altogether a regiment
numbered about 1,440 soldiers 260
officers 130 support staff 44 horses
eight wagons and 230
tents at the next organizational level
was the
Brigade however unlike our prior units
this force was purely a tactical group
with no administrative function during a
campaign various regiments would be
brigaded together as deemed necessary
for the mission at
hand as such their strength varied
typically ranging anywhere from about 2
and a half th000 to 5,500
men for our purposes we will model a
brigade with three of our previously
defined regiments for a total of six
battalions using our prior figures it
numbered numbers about
staff 132 horses 24 wagons and 690
tents Beyond this brigades had minimal
headquarters and support staff owing to
their purely tactical
role we will thus assume that its new
elements consist only of a brigadier
general his Aid as well as a few
servants horses and
wagons altogether this bumps up our head
count for the Brigade
negligibly ultimately it was a massive
Force roughly equivalent in size to a
Roman
legion any larger force would begin to
severely tax the command and control
capabilities of the era thus in the
French armies of the Napoleonic Wars a
brigade stood as the largest pure
infantry
unit when deployed for battle it would
typically do so with each of the
battalions formed into their own column
of
attack to avoid being shot these would
often seek cover or even lay prone until
it came time to
advance when the order to attack was
received the battalions moved rapidly
towards their objective being sure to
maintain proper spacing so as to avoid
entanglement and cannon
fire only at the last minute would
French Doctrine dictate that they deploy
into a line unleashing fire across a 630
M front or simply plow through the enemy
with a Bayonet
charge such were the efficient
aggressive tactics which won Napoleon
his
Wars but this is only part of the
story we have yet to cover the units of
Cavalry and the artillery let alone the
greater combined arm arms groups which
made up the infamous French Army Core
join us next time as we continue to
explore the true size of Napoleon's
Army you can catch script previews and
download all our art by becoming a
channel member or joining our patreon a
huge thanks to our current supporters
and the researchers writers and artists
for making this episode possible we
couldn't have done it without this team
and this community if you enjoyed this
episode be sure to like And subscribe
for more content and check out these
other related videos see you in the next
[Music]
one
